---
title: 'Change, safety, and drive (Part 1)'
date: 2021-05-11T13:00:00.000+10:00
draft: true
tags : [lean, agile, culture]
---

People can only endure a certain number of 'agile' or 'digital' transformations
before they become disenfranchised with any change within an organisation.
Change, although inevitable and necessary, needs to be reasoned and if possible,
measured. If people are constantly being forced to change, especially if that
change is not explained or unreasonable, then they will experience a level of
change fatigue that will form cynicism and bitterness with their leaders and the
wider organisation.

Change, especially good change is necessary for any high performing team or
organisation. The challenge is to maintain a level of safety when change occurs
so that people remain focussed and driven on the overall objectives.

Before outlining how change should occur, below are common pitfalls that should
be avoided when driving change within a team or organisation:

## Inspection is as Important as Adaption

Change, pivot, or adaption; whatever it is called needs to be measured and
inspected in order to determine whether that change was effective or not.
Recurring change that is completely speculative, without adapting according to
data, is change that will overload people and cause cynicism. Whilst the
traditional metrics such as sales, revenue, and profit are necessary to inspect,
other metrics such as employee wellness, retention, and engagement are just as
important. In addition, if the team is engineering-focussed, metrics such as
time to recovery, open defects, and speed to market would also need to be
assessed in order to make informed decisions in the direction to which to adapt.

## Respect People

Treating team members like minions or resources will inevitably cause burn-out
and cynicism. Limit corporate speak and be frank with the reasons on why change
is occurring, even if that change may affect people negatively. An example of a
communique to avoid:

> The synergy alignment between the capabilities that drive innovation has been
affected by the current macroeconomic environment which means a reduction in
head count across departments

Instead, try:

> Due to external economic pressures, we'll need to reduce head count

It is a false dichotomy to assume that using more useless, verbose statements
makes the message appear intelligent. If you are a leader, I beg you: do not
attempt this behaviour.

## Avoid the Perception of Change

All too often in 'agile' transformations are just a means to rename half the
project managers to product owners and the other half to scrum masters. This
doesn't solve the underlying reasons of having a transformation in the first
place, but just creates a perception of change. In addition to this, there are
many things that create a perception of change these include (amongst other
things): renaming job titles, more social events, more beer or chocolate in the
kitchen, and more noise. All these things, although important, do not contribute
to a lasting and real positive change, they are often facades or worse, a
perception of positive change.
